# ECE 358: Computer Networks

Professor: Albert Wasef

## Chapter 1: Introduction

<!-- 2018 May 02 -->

- The internet consists of:
  - Hosts (end systems), running network apps
  - Communication links (fiber, copper, radio, satellite)
  - Packet switches (routers and switches)

- Protocols control the sending and receiving of messages
  - Define format, order of messages, actions taken
- Internet standards include:
  - RFC: Request for comments
  - IETF: Internet Engineering Task Force

- Network structure:
  - Edge: Hosts (clients and servers)
  - Access networks, physical media: Communication links
  - Network core: Interconnected routers. The "network of networks".

- Types of access nets:
  - DSL
  - Cable

- DSL: Digital subscriber line.
  - Using existing telephone lines to connect to the internet.
  - A DSLAM (DSL Access Multiplexer) is installed at the edge of the telephone
    network
  - A splitter at the home decides between a DSL modem and a telephone
  - Transmission rates: 2.5 Mbps upstream, 24 Mbps downstream
    - This asymmetry is mainly economics (customers usually want faster
      downstream, so more bandwidth is allocated)

- Cable network
  - Uses *frequency division multiplexing* -- different channels are
    transmitted in different frequency bands.
  - HFC: Hybrid fiber coax

(part 2)

- Wireless access networks
  - Wireless LAN: within building. 802.11b/g (wifi) is 54 Mbps
  - Wide-area wireless: covers a larger area. 3G, 4G are LTE

- How transmission happens
  - Host sends packets of length L (bits)
  - Transmits packet into access network at transmission rate R (bits/sec)
  - Packet transmission delay = L / R (sec)
  - Time to transmit one bit = 1 / R (sec / bit)

- Physical media
  - Guided vs. unguided
    - Guided media: Solid, like copper, fiber, or coaxial cable.
    - Unguided media: Radio waves.
  - Twisted pair: Two insulated copper wires that are twisted around each
    other to minimize interference.
    - Cat5: 100 Mbps, 1 Gbps (typically blue)
    - Cat6: 10 Gbps (typically yellow)
    - Can only provide a single channel due to the material that's used.
  - Coaxial cable
    - Two concentric copper conductors
    - Broadband
  - Fiber optic cable
    - Glass fiber carrying light
    - Secure (can't tap into it) (?)
    - Low error rate
  - Radio
    - Propagation is affected by environment
      - Reflection
      - Obstruction
      - Interference
    - Needs line of sight.
    - Types:
      - Terrestrial microwave: up to 45 Mbps
      - LAN/wifi: 11 Mbps, 54 Mbps
      - Wide-area (e.g. cellular): a few Mbps
      - Satellite: Kbps to 45 Mbps
        - 280 ms end-to-end delay

- The network core
  - Packet switching
    - "Store and forward": The entire packet must arrive before it can be
      transmitted to the next link.
      - This implies that each link introduces an additional packet transmission
      delay.
    - Routing and forwarding
      - [Routing] is determining the route that should be taken by packets
      - [Forwarding] is actually forwarding the packets
  - Circuit switching
    - You actually get a physical circuit to the other machine
    - Like traditional telephone networks
    - FDM: Frequency Division Multiplexing
    - TDM: Time Division Multiplexing

<!-- 2018 May 4 -->

- How are access net interconnected?
  - Connect every access net to every other access net. O(n²), doesn't
    web-scale
  - In reality:
    - Tier-1 ISPs are connected via IXPs (Internet Exchange Points) and
      peering links
    - Regional nets group together Tier-1 ISPs (e.g. Rogers, Bell)
    - Also companies create their own CDNs that connect directly to access nets
    - So really the internet is a poset

- Loss and delay
  - If the arrival rate exceeds the output link capacity, then packets will
    queue up and this introduces a delay, which means no arbitrage for you
    tonight.
  - Four sources of packet delay: 
    - `d_nodal = d_proc + d_queue + d_trans + d_prop`
    - `d_proc`: Processing delay (software or ASICs on the node); usu. < 1ms
    - `d_queue`: Queueing delay
    - `d_trans`: Transmission delay. `L/R` where L: packet length; R: link
      bandwidth
    - `d_prop`: Propagation delay. `d/s` where d: length of wire, s:
      propagation speed (~(2/3)c)
  - Queueing delay:
    - let R = link bandwith
    - and L = packet length
    - and a = average packet arrival rate in
    - The queueing delay increases as La/R goes from 0 to 1, then becomes
      unbounded.
  - In reality, packets are dropped when the queue is full.

- In traceroute, `* * *` indicates that a router isn't replying. (It might
  still be working, but ignoring you.)

- Throughput
  - Rate at which user receives useful data.
  - Instantaneous vs. Average.
  - Example: Consider two pipes with throughputs Rs and Rc. Then end-to-end
    throughput is min(Rs, Rc). The slower pipe is the **bottleneck link**.
  - If n users are using a pipe, then it has effective throughput R/n.

<!-- 2018 May 7 -->

- OSI model: Layered model of internet.
  - Physical
  - Link
  - Network
  - Transport
  - (Session)
  - (Presentation)
  - Application
  - Layers in parens are fake, part of OSI model which was invented when people
    had no idea what they were doing

- Encapsulation / Decapsulation
  - It's when you have nested boxes, unwrap some, and rebox in others
  -       M: message
  -     HtM: segment
  -   HnHtM: datagram
  - HlHnHtM: frame

- The source and destination encapsulate all five layers
- A switch implements only Physical and Link
- A router implements only Physical, Link, and Network

- Network security
  - Internet was not originally designed with security in mind.
  - Cat-and-mouse game between hackers and internet designers.

- Malware
  - Virus: Executed self-replication infection
  - Worm: Passively received self-replication infection
  - Spyware Malware: Record and upload input
  - Infected hosts can be part of a botnet

## Chapter 2: Application Layer

<!-- 2018 May 7 -->

- When you write a network app, you only have to write the application layer.

- Application architectures:
  - client/server
  - peer to peer

- Socket
  - Like a pipe implemented at the transport layer and under

- Application layer protocols
  - Defines:
    - Types of messages
    - Message syntax
    - Message semantics
    - Rules for sending messages
  - Can be open or proprietary

- Transport service requirements
  - Data integrity
  - Throughput
  - Timing
  - Security
- Look at those four things for common apps (EXAM, previous midterm)

- Securing TCP: use SSL at the application layer

<!-- 2018 May 11 -->

- An RTT is a RoundTrip Time

- HTTP persistence
  - Non-persistent: Each TCP connection is closed after one request.
  - Persistent: Multiple objects sent over a single TCP connection.

- HTTP Delay Estimation interactive is incorrect with pipelining?

- HTTP request format:
  - Request line
    - method sp URL sp version CRLF
  - Header lines
    - header-field-name sp value CRLF
    - CRLF
  - Body
    - entity body

- Uploading form input:
  - POST: input uploaded to server in entity body
  - GET: input encoded at end of URL

- HTTP methods:
  - HTTP/1.0: GET, POST, HEAD (don't include body)
  - HTTP/1.1: GET, POST, HEAD, PUT (upload file), DELETE (delete file)

- HTTP headers:
  - Date: Time of sending the response.
  - Last-Modified: Mtime
  - Content-Length: in bytes

- Cookies:
  - Four components:
    - Cookie header line of response
    - Cookie header line in subsequent requests
    - Cookie file kept browser-side
    - Database kept website-side

- Web caching
  - Cache acts as both client and server
  - Example: 97.4% utilization; 4.5 sec total delay
    - 100x access link rate makes it 0.974% utilization; 2 sec total delay
    - Local web cache with 0.4 hit rate: 1.29 total delay

<!-- 2018 May 14 -->

- DNS
  - Domain name system.
  - A hierarchy of **name servers**, forming a **distributed database**.
  - Provides services:
    - Hostname to IP resolution
    - Host aliasing
    - Mail server aliasing
    - Load distribution (one name, many IPs)
  - **Root name servers** are contacted if a local name server canont resolve.
    - They contact the **authoritative name server** for that name.
  - TLD (Top-level domain) servers: For TLDs.
    - Network Solutions maintains the .com TLD server.
    - Educause does .edu.
  - Authoritative name server: Organization's own DNS servers.
  - Local name server: "default name server". Has cache.
  - Resolution example
    - Iterated query: "I don't know this, but ask this server"
    - Recursive query: "I don't know this, but I'll get this for you"
      - Heavy load at higher levels
    - Typically, flow is:
      - Requesting host
      - Local DNS server
      - Root DNS server
      - TLD DNS server
      - Authoritative DNS server
  - Caching
    - TTL: Time to live
    - Can be out of date
    - RFC 2136: Update/notify mechanism proposed by IETF
  - RR: Resource records
    - (name, value, type, ttl)
    - Types:
      - A: Authoritative. name is hostname, value is IP address
      - CNAME: Canonical name. name is alias name, value is canonical name
      - NS: Nameserver. name is domain, value is authoritative name server
      - MX: Mailserver. name is domain, value is mailserver
  - DNS protocol
    - identification; flags
    - # questions; # answer RRs; # authority RRs; # additional RRs
    - Questions;   Answers;      Authority;       Additional info
  - Attacking DNS
    - DDoS on DNS:
      - Bombard root server with traffic.
        - Not successful so far due to traffic filtering, root server bypass
      - Bombard TLD servers: "Potentially more dangerous."
    - Redirect attacks:
      - Man in the middle
      - DNS poisoning (bogus replies which are cached)
    - Exploit DNS for DDoS:
      - Send queries with spoofed source address -> target ip
      - Requires leverage

## Chapter 3

- Transport layers and protocols
  - Transport layer: Layer below the application
  - Provides logical end-to-end transport as a service to the application
  - Vs. network layer
    - Network layer is between hosts.
    - Transport layer is between processes. A host can have multiple processes.
  - Multiplexing and demultiplexing
    - at sender: multiplexing to combine multiple sockets into one stream
    - at receeiver: demultiplexing to split it apart again
  - TODO: Review types of demuxing

<!-- 2018 May 18 -->

- UDP: User datagram protocol (RFC 768)
  - No frills. Fast, but segments may be lost, out of order
  - Connectionless
  - Used for streaming, DNS, SNMP
  - If you want reliability, must add it at the application layer

- UDP checksum
  - It's a wrapping sum of the rest of the segment chunked into 16-bit chunks

- Reliable data transfer
  - We want functions:
    - Sender: `rdt_send` which calls `udt_send`
    - Receiver: `rdt_rcv`, which calls `deliver_data`
  - Use FSMs on both sender and receiver side
  - rdt1.0: assume reliable channel, then it's very simple
  - rdt2.0: "stop and wait". must recover from errors
    - ACK: acknowledgement
    - NAK: negative acknowledgement; got packet but it had errors
    - On an exam, you may explain the RDT FSM with code or with text
    - Fatal flaw: ACK/NAK corrupted
  - rdt2.1: handle lost ACKs and NAKs
    - add sequence number to packets; receiver discards duplicates; sender
      - for now, just have sequence numbers 0 and 1 for parity
      retransmits packets where ACKs aren't received
  - rdt2.2: NAK-free
    - receiver sends ACK tagged with seq num of last packet received
  - rdt3.0: channels can lose packets too
    - sender waits a reasonable time for ACK, retransmits if no ACK in that
      time
    - but performance is bad because of stop-and-wait behavior
    - use pipelining

- Pipelined protocols
  - Go-back-N
    - Sender has up to N unacked packets in pipeline
    - Receiver only sends cumulative ack (seq num such that all packets up to
      that seq num have been received)
    - Sender has timer for oldest unacked packet; when expired, retransmit all
      unacked packets
    - Used by TCP
  - Selective repeat
    - Sender has up to N unacked packets in pipeline
    - Receiver sends individual ack for each packet
    - Separate timer for each unacked packet; when expired, retransmit only
      that one


- Performance of sliding window: TODO

<!-- 2018 May 25 -->

- TCP
  - Connection-oriented, point-to-point, reliable, in-order byte stream, full
    duplex data, pipelined, flow controlled

- TCP Structure
  - source port; dest port
  - seq num
  - ack num
  - head len; not used; UAPRSF; RWD (receive window: # bytes receiver willing
    to receive)
    - URG: urgent data (not used)
    - ACK: ack # valid
    - PSH: push data now (not used)
    - RST, SYN, FIN: connection setup, synchronize, teardown
  - checksum; urgent data pointer
  - options (var len)
  - application data (var len)

- TCP reliability
  - SampleRTT: Samples the round trip time, for setting TCP timeout value
    - EstimatedRTT: Uses an EWMA, alpha = 0.125
    - DevRTT: Deviation
    - TimeoutInterval = EstimatedRTT + 4 * DevRTT (FOUR SIGMA)

  - Reliability via sequence numbers, cumulative ACKs

  - Three events in sender:
    - Received data from app: create segment, start timer if not already running
    - Timeout: retransmit segment that caused timeout, reset timer
    - Received ACK: update what is known, start timer if still unacked segments

  - Fast retransmit:
    - with TRIPLE DUPLICATE ACKs, resend earliest unacked segment without
      waiting for timeout

- TCP flow control
  - Receiver prevents sender from transmitting too quickly
  - ... by advertising free buffer spacing with the RWND value

- TCP connection management
  - Handshake before any data is exchanged
  - Agree on connection parameters
  - 2-way handshake:
    - "Let's talk" "OK"
    - Won't always work. Variable delays, retransmitted messages, message
      reordering
    - Review the failure scenarios
      - Half-open connection with a retransmit
      - With additional retransmits, can get even worse
  - Instead: 3-way handshake
    - (->) SYN=1, Seq=x; x is random
    - (<-) SYN=1, ACK=1, Seq=y, ACK=x+1; y is random.
    - Client ESTAB'd
    - (->) ACK=1, ACK=y+1; 
    - Server ESTAB'd
  - Closing a connection
    - Both client and server send FIN=1
    - Respond to FIN with ACK (can combine into FINACK)

<!-- 2018 May 28 -->
<!-- Missed class due to fatness -->

- Congestion control
  - Don't want to send too much data for the network to handle
  - Results in lost packets, long delays
  - Three scenarios:
    - 1: Two senders, two receivers, one infinite buffer router
      - Large queueing delay as λin -> λout
    - 2: One router, finite buffers, sender retransmits
      - Duplicate retransmits
      - Asymptotic goodput is less than R/2
    - 3: 4 senders, multihop paths, timeout/retransmit
      - More routers = more wasted network effort
      - Dropped packets = entire upstream path wasted
  - Approaches
    - End-to-end congestion control
      - No feedback from network
      - Inferred from end-system observed loss, delay
      - e.g. TCP
    - Network-assisted congestion control
      - Routers provide feedback to end systems
      - Congestion bit (e.g. SNA, DECbit, TCP/IP ECN, ATM)
      - Explicit rate for senders

- TCP congestion control
  - Sender increases transmission rate until loss occurs
  - Additive increase: increase cwnd by 1 MSS until loss detected
  - Multiplicative decrease: cut cwnd in half after loss
  - Results in sawtooth behavior
  - rwnd is usually large
  - TCP Slow Start
    - Initially cwnd = 1 MSS
    - Double rate until first loss, to ramp up
  - TCP Tahoe: Always set cwnd to 1 after a loss, exponential until ssthresh,
    then linear
  - TCP Reno: Just reset to ssthresh

- TCP throughput
  - 3/4 W / RTT bytes / sec because sawtooth between W/2 and W

- TCP futures

- TCP fairness
  - If K TCP sessions share a bottleneck link of capacity R, each should have
    average rate K/R
  - TCP is fair
  - Multimedia: shouldn't use TCP, since you want audio/video to be sent at
    constant rate; must tolerate packet loss

<!-- 2018 Jun 1 -->
<!-- Missed first 30m of class -->

## 4: Network layer

### 4.1. Introduction

- Network layer
  - Host-to-host

- Key network-layer functions:
  - Forwarding
  - Routing
  - Sometimes: Connection setup
    - ATM, frame relay, X.25
    - Routers are involved in establishing connection between end hosts
    - Connects to hosts, as opposed to transport-layer which connects two
      processes

- Network service model
  - Service model: Best effort, CBR, VBR, ABR, or UBR
  - Guarantees
    - Bandwidth: None, constant rate, guaranteed rate, guaranteed minimum
    - Loss: y/n
    - Order: y/n
    - Timing: y/n
  - Congestion feedback: y/n
  - Internet is: best effort, none, no, no, no

### 4.2. Virtual circuit vs. datagram networks

- Connection vs. connectionless service
  - Datagram networks: connectionless
  - Virtual-circuit networks: connection
  - Like TCP/UDP dichotomy connection/connectionless, but:
    - The service is host-to-host instead of process-to-process
    - You have no choice: you have to have one or the other
    - Implementation is in network core instead of transport layer

- Virtual circuits
  - Much like a physical telephone circuit, but virtual
  - Routers must maintain state for each connection
  - Each packet carries VC identifier, not destination host address

- VC forwarding tables
  - Complicated.
  - Tables contain:
    - Incoming interface, incoming VC #
    - Outgoing interface, outgoing VC #

- Signaling protocols
  - For setting up, maintaining, and tearing down virtual circuits
  - Used in ATM, frame-relay, X.25
  - Not used in today's internet.
  - e.g.
    - 1. initiate call
    - 2. incoming call, 3. accept call
    - 4. call connected, 5. data flow begins
    - 6. receive data
    - ... all in the Network layer!

- Datagram networks
  - Just have a forwarding table from destination address to link interfaces
  - Can't map every single IP. Instead, map IP ranges
  - For efficiency, use longest prefix matching

### 4.3. Inside a router

- Two key router functions:
  - Run routing algorithms
  - Forward datagrams from input to output links

- Three layers of every router: Physical, Link, Network
