# CS 348: Databases

Professor: Grant Weddell

## 1. Introduction

- Data is facts.
- We mainly deal with **persistent**, not **volatile** data.
- Data: Large persistent collection of information with efficient get and update.
- Database management system: Set of programs that manage a database.
- Schema: How data is organized
- Types of schemas:
  - External (view): What applications see.
  - Conceptual: Logical structure of all data.
  - Physical: Files, devices, storage algorithms.
- Data independence: DBMS provides an abstract data model
  - Physical: immune to changes in storage structures
  - Logical: immune to changes in data organization
- Transaction: Application-specified atomic, durable unit of work.
- Transactions are ACID:
  - Atomic: all or nothing
  - Consistent: retains database consistency
  - Isolated: don't interfere with each other
  - Durable: changes stay once transaction is completed
- Languages:
  - Data definition language (DDL): for schemas
  - Data manipulation language (DML): for queries and updates
    - Can be **navigational** (procedural) or **non-navigational** (declarative)

## 2. The relational model

- All information is organized in a number of relations.
- Components:
  - Universe: Set of values D with quality (=)
  - Relation:
    - schema: name R, arity k
    - instance: relation R sube D^k
  - Database:
    - schema: set of relation schemes
    - instance: relation Ri for each Ri
  - Notation: signature rho = (R1, ..., Rn), instance D = (D, =, R1, ..., Rn)
    - WTF is this awful name reuse? IDK, IDC, and SIU.
- Valuation: Maps variable names to values in the universe.
- Complete semantics
  - Complicated super-formal notation
  - Database instance D = (D, =, R, S, ...)
  - Valuation θ : { x₁, x₂, ...} → D is such that
    - D, θ ⊧ R(xi1, ..., xik)   if R ∈ ρ, (θ(xi1), ..., θ(xik)) 
    - Actually, fuck the semantics
- Integrity constraints: Stuff that must be true in a valid database instance
- View: An integrity constraint that extends the DB schema, creating a virtual table
- Unsafe queries: Can have infinite answers.
- Domain-independent query: Satisfies a thing. (TODO)
  - Thm: Answers to these queries only contain values that exist in R1, ..., Rk (the active domain)
- Range-restricted query: A class of domain-independent queries.
  - diq can be rewritten as an equivalent rrq.
- Computational properties
  - Relational calculus is not Turing complete, since every query evaluation terminates
  - **Data complexity**: complexity in the size of the database for a *fixed query*
    - in PTIME, LOGSPACE, AC₀
  - **Combined complexity**: in PSPACE, but not PTIME (You can express SAT)
- TODO: A bunch of stuff went over your head, review this later

## 3. SQL

- Three parts of the language:
  - DML: Data manipulation language
  - DDL: Data definition language
  - DLC: Data control language
- SQL data types: integer, smallint, decimal(m,n), float, char(n), varchar(n), date, time
- SELECT results FROM tables WHERE condition
  - `SELECT DISTINCT * FROM author;`
    - Selects all authors
  - `SELECT DISTINCT r1.publication FROM wrote r1, wrote r2 WHERE r1.publication = r2.publication and r1.author != r2.author;
    - Selects all publications with at least two authors
  - `SELECT DISTINCT title FROM publication, book WHERE publication.pubid = book.pubid`
    - Selects titles of all books
- UNION, EXCEPT, INTERSECT
  - Set operations
  - Use like: `(select distinct pubid from book) union (select distinct pubid from journal)
- WITH
  - Used for subqueries
  - Use like: `WITH thing AS (SELECT xxx) SELECT yyy FROM thing`
  - Can also subquery inline: `SELECT yyy FROM (SELECT xxx)`
- First-order SQL shortcomings
  - Some queries are hard to write (need syntactic sugar)
  - No counting (need aggregation)
  - No "path in graph" (need recursion)
- WHERE subqueries
  - WHERE attr IN ( Q )
  - WHERE attr NOT IN ( Q )
  - WHERE attr op SOME ( Q )
  - WHERE attr op ALL ( Q )
  - WHERE EXISTS ( Q )
  - WHERE NOT EXISTS ( Q )
  - Parametric subqueries: basically you can access upper scope
- Bag operations
  - UNION ALL
  - EXCEPT ALL
  - INTERSECT ALL

## 2017 Oct 6

- Miami is probably underwater (SIZZLING LIKE A STEAK)
- We will be reviewing all content today next class.
- Questions that can be expressed in the relational calculus:
  - Can't tell you exactly but I can give major hints
  - There are exactly five of them
  - Heavily weighted towards earlier questions
  - Three big characteristics of SQL that cannot be relational calculused:
    - sorting (ORDER BY)
    - multiset semantics -- relational calculus is set semantics
    - Aggregate functions: unbounded use of SUM, COUNT
      - note: MAX and MIN are fine
      - unbounded means the result can grow arbitrarily large
    - Note: NULL semantics MAY still be allowed
- Every class has at least one schedule
- cnum is varchar(5); guaranteed 2 letters + 3 numbers
- It's important that you thoroughly appreciated the metadata
- select distinct c.cname from course c where c.cnum like 'CS%'
  - yes this can be expressed in the relational calculus
  - x = y is also ok
    - either term can be a variable, constant, or an expression
    - <, <=, !=, >=, > also allowed (atomic constructs)
  - this would be, in the RC:
    - { <c.cname> | ∃ c.cnum . course(c.cnum, c.cname) ∧ c.cname like 'CS%' }
      - we're allowed to use LIKE
  - Current term === !exists mark for some class in the term
- #4: allow students who have never taken a CS course
- metahint: in case of ambiguity, lean toward solution involving less code
- #4 can be RC'd
- can assume every student has an enrollment
- "completed two years": year >= 3
- Add comments with perceived ambiguities for mark insurance
- We will make grading mistakes
- #10: "The % of profs in AM who are ... divided by % of profs in PM ..."
- The collating sequence of 24h time string matches "earlier in the day"

- Authors examples
- "get ids of authors who have never authored a book"
  - is this a conjunctive query? no, because of "never" --> implied "for every"
  - ugly:
    - select distinct a.aid from author a where NOT EXISTS (
      - select * from book b where exists (
        - select * from wrote w where w.author = a.aid and w.publication = b.pubid
      - )
    - )
  - better ("alternative formulation"):
    - select distinct a.aid from author a where NOT EXISTS (
      - select * from book b, wrote w
        - where w.author = a.aid and w.publication = b.pubid
      - )
    - )
  - rel calc:
    - { <a.aid> | ¬∃ pid, pub, year . (book(pid, pub, year) ∧ wrote(a.aid, pid)) }
    - can also change `not exists` to `forall not`
  - can collapse exists. cannot collapse NOT exists.
  - ALWAYS PUT DISTINCT, don't worry about performance!!
- "get ids of authors who have never authored more journals than books in any year"
  - Try to start:
    - select distinct a.aid from author a where ???
  - LET THERE BE SUBRESULTS
    - T1: (aid, year, bc (book count))
      - with T1(aid, year, bc) as (
        - select distinct a.aid, b.year, count(*)  <-- unbounded count!
        - ... from author a, wrote w, book b
        - ... where w.author = a.aid and w.publication = b.pubid
        - ... group by a.aid, b.year
      - )
    - T2: (aid, year, jc (journal count))
      - with T2(aid, year, bc) as (
        -
      - )
  - Then, we can use
    - select distinct a.aid from author a where not exists (
      - select * from T1 t1, T2 t2 where t1.aid = t2.aid and t1.year = t2.year and 
      - ... t1.aid = a.aid and t1.bc < t2.jc
    - )

## Application programming and SQL

- For A2, we will use Static Embedded SQL Protocol
- EXEC SQL WHATEVER;
- It's horrendous

## Week 5: DYNESQL

- SQL/PSM: Persistent Stored Modules. Server-side executed code.
- `db2 prep name.sql` preprocesses sqc files.
- Types of variables:
  - Host variables:
    - Local variables that, when prefixed with :, can be used in embedded SQL
  - Indicator variables:
    - smallint ind; SELECT ... INTO :thing INDICATOR :ind FROM ...;
    - If ind < 0, then :thing is NULL.
- Multiple tuples
  - EXEC SQL DECLARE cursor CURSOR FOR SELECT ...;
  - Then, iterate as follows:
  - EXEC SQL OPEN cursor;
    EXEC SQL WHENEVER NOT FOUND GO TO end;
    for (;;) { EXEC SQL FETCH thing INTO :thing; do things to thing; };
    end: EXEC SQL CLOSE cursor;
- No nested cursors preferably
- Stored procedures:
  - Define:
      CREATE FUNCTION sumThing(dept CHAR(3))
        RETURNS DECIMAL(9, 2)
        LANGUAGE SQL
      RETURN
        SELECT ...
  - Use:
      SELECT sumThing(deptno) AS sal ...
  - Table-valued fn:
      CREATE FUNCTION ...
        RETURNS TABLE(salary DECIMAL(9,2))
        LANGUAGE SQL
      RETURN
        SELECT salary FROM ...
  - Can also have `DECLARE ... CONDITION FOR SQLSTATE '02000'`;
  - Can also have `DECLARE EXIT HANDLERL FOR not_found SET rating=-1`;
  - Can also have `IF X THEN ... ELSEIF Y THEN ... ELSE ... END IF`

## Week 6: DYNESQL

- Unsafe execution:
  - EXEC SQL EXECUTE IMMEDIATE :string;
- Safe execution:
  - EXEC SQL PREPARE stmt FROM :string;
  - EXEC SQL EXECUTE stmt USING :var1, ..., :vark;
- Using cursors with premeditated queries:
  - EXEC SQL DECLARE cursor CURSOR FOR stmt;
    EXEC SQL OPEN cname USING :var1, ..., :vark;
    EXEC SQL FETCH cname INTO :out1, ..., :outn;
    EXEC SQL CLOSE cname;
- Dynamic descriptor area:
  - For unknown number/types of variables
  - ALLOCATE DESCRIPTOR descr
  - GET DESCRIPTOR descr what
  - SET DESCRIPTOR descr what 
  - DESCRIBE (INPUT|OUTPUT) stmt INTO descr
- SQLDA: SQL Description Area

## 2017 Oct 20

- Please come to office hours

## Week 7: ODBC

- Environments
- Connections
- Statements

## Week 7: Data modeling and the entity-relationship model.

- E-R diagrams are diagrams for database schemas.
- **Entity set**: Set of entities of the same type.
  - Graphically: BOX with name.
  - **Entity**: Distinguishable object.
- **Attribute**: Properties of an entity.
  - Graphically: CIRCLE with name, connected to Entity set.
  - **Domain**: Set of permitted attribute values.
- **Relationship set**: Says that two entities are related
  - **Relationship**: Two entities are related
  - Graphically: DIAMOND with name, connecting several entity sets.
  - May have attributes
- **Role name**: Indicates a role
  - **Role**: The function of an entity set in a relationship set
  - Graphically: LABELLED edges of a DIAMOND.
- **Primary key**: Set of attributes that uniquely identifies entities
  - Graphically: UNDERLINED name in CIRCLE.
- Relationship types:
  - Many-to-many
  - Many-to-one
  - One-to-many
  - One-to-one
  - Graphically: ARROWHEAD toward the DIAMOND if an entity set is "one".
- Existence dependencies
  - If x is existence dependent on y, then y is a dominant entity, x is a subordinate entity.
  - Graphically: DIAMOND and subordinate entity set BOX are both DOUBLE BORDERED.
  - Weak entity set: Contains subordinate entities
  - Strong entity set: Contains no subordinate entities
  - Weak entity attributes inherit the primary keys of their dominant.
  - Identifying subordinate entities (TODO)
- Cardinality constraints
  - Edge from BOX to DIAMOND can be labelled with (lower, upper) bounds.
- From this point on: These are all extensions
- Structured attributes
  - Composite attributes: Attributes composed of other attributes with edges.
    - Graphically: EDGEs between two CIRCLES
  - Multi-value attributes: Set-valued attributes.
    - Graphically: DOUBLE EDGE between BOX and CIRCLE.
- Aggregation
  - Relationships viewed as higher-level entities
  - Graphically:
    - BIG BOX around diamond and boxes it's connected to.
    - From big box, edges to higher level relationships.
- Specialization
  - Entity set that can be derived from an existing entity set.
  - Graphically: HOLLOW TRIANGLE in middle of edge between two BOXes, pointing toward the existing entity set.
  - Generalization
    - Several entity sets abstracted by a more general entity set.
    - Graphically: Same as Specialization, but with multiple things behind the HOLLOW TRIANGLE.
  - Disjointness
    - Specialized entity sets can have entities in common.
    - Graphically: "OVERLAPS" next to the HOLLOW TRIANGLE.
- Designing an E-R schema
  - Attributes or entity set? Questions:
    - Is is it a separate object?
    - Do we maintain information about it?
    - Can several belong to a single entity?
    - Does it make sense to delete such an object?
    - Can it be missing from some of the entity set's entities?
    - Can it be shared by different entities?
  - Entity sets or relationships?
    - e.g. Accounts can be entities or relationships between Branch and Customer with Balance and AccountNum attributes
  - Binary or n-ary relationships?
    - n-ary relationships can be reduced to n binary relationships with a new "hub" entity set
- A simple methodology: Do in this order.
  - Entity sets
  - Relationship sets and their participating entity sets
  - Attributes
  - Relationship types, existence dependencies
  - Cardinality constraints, keys, discriminators
  - You're done! Draw the diagram.
- Review the Registrar's Database example

## Week 7: Translating entity-relationship to relational tables

- Main ideas:
  - Entity set (BOX) -> Table
  - Attribute (CIRCLE) -> Table column
  - Relationship (DIAMOND) -> Either table columns, or a new table
- Strong entity sets
  - Just take their attributes as the columns of a table
- Weak entity sets
  - Columns should be:
    - attributes of the weak entity set
    - attributes of the identifying relationship set
    - PRIMARY KEY attributes of the dominating entities
- Relationship sets
  - If it identifies a weak entity set, do nothing
  - If there is a (1,1) relationship with entity set E, then table E gets new columns:
    - Attributes of relationship set
    - PRIMARY KEY attributes of component entity sets
  - Otherwise: Use a new table
  - Columns include:
    - Its own attributes
    - Primary key attributes of *each* component entity set
  - Primary key is:
    - If (0,1) constraint for some entity set E, then take E's primary keys
    - Otherwise, primary keys of every component entity
- Aggregation
  - Treat the aggregation like an entity set whose primary key is the primary key of the table for R
- Specialization
  - Create table for higher-level entity set.
  - Treat specialized entity subsets as weak entity sets.
- Generalization (Approach 1)

## Week 8: 

- ER diagrams can be turned into relational diagrams
  - Relational diagrams make more sense
- RDF: Resource Description Framework
- Triggers: Database engine "if this then that" rules
- CHECK constraints: Arbitrary constraints
- VIEW: Virtual "table" computed from other table's database.
  - CREATE VIEW name AS ( query )
  - A materialized view is concretely constructed in th
  - Imagine a world... where the ONLY way to get information is to materialize views
    - Query optimization is finding the most efficient reformulation of a query
      - THE ULTIMATE PHYSICAL DESIGN LANGUAGE.
  - Updating views: Must be propagated to actual tables. Sometimes not possible.
- Data Control Language: Permissions
  - `GRANT  <what> ON <object> TO <users>`
  - `REVOKE <what> ON <object> FROM <users>`
  - `<users>` can be users or user groups
- Midterm ends here

## 2017 Nov 3: Midterm review

- What feature in SQL do you use to define external schema?
  - internalize GRANT and REVOKE as the mechanism of subsetting the data.
  - External schemas are just subsets of the conceptual schema. (or maybe the other way around)
  - Logical data independence: Can change conceptual schema without changing external schema
  - I don't like the formulation of 1. (a). Should be: Why would it be desirable to deny a subset of users
  - Views are just tables whose contents are populated by some query.
    - Another case where you'd expect the database engine to do more work.
  - Internal schema: Metadata that tells you about physical place things are stored

## 8: Functional dependencies

- Anomaly: Bad thing
- Schema Decomposition: Avoids anomalies while retaining all information in the instances
- Integrity Constraint: Only allow well-behaved instances of the schema
- Functional dependency: Allow a set of attributes to uniquely DETERMINE another set of attributes. 
  - Defn: R: Relation schema, X, Y in R: sets of attributes.
  - Then a functional dependency X -> Y is the formula:
    - (basically, set of attributes X implies set of attributes Y)
    - We say X functionally determines Y, in R.
- Logically implied functional dependency:
  - A set F logically implies X -> Y if X -> Y holds for all instances of R that satisfy F.
- Closure:
  - A closure of F+ of F is all functional dependencies logically implied by F
  - F+ may contain more stuff than F
- Reasoning about functional dependencies: Use Armstrong's axioms
  - Reflexivity: Y sube X => X -> Y
  - Augmentation: X -> Y => XZ -> YZ
  - Transitivity: X -> Y, Y -> Z => X -> Z
  - These axioms are sound and complete
  - Additional derived rules:
    - Union: X -> Y, X -> Z => X -> YZ
    - Decomposition: X -> YZ => X -> Y
- Superkey: K sube R s.t. K -> R
- Candidate key: K sube R s.t. K -> R is a superkey no subset of K is a superkey
- Primary key: Candidate key chosen by the DBA
- Computing a decomposition
  - {R1, ..., Rn} is a decomposition if R = union {R1, ..., Rn}.
  - Good decomposition:
    - Does not lose information
    - Does not complicate checking of constraints
    - Does not contain anomalies
- Lossless-join decomposition
  - Decomposition of a table that isn't shitty (is lossless)
- Dependency preservation: Interrelational constraints require join to test, which is bad.
- Avoiding anomalies
  - In order of increasing refinement: 1NF, 3NF, BCNF
- 1NF: Every cell is primitive.
- 3NF: Third Normal Form
  - Whenever (X -> Y) in F+ and XY in R, then either:
    - BCNF is satisfied, or
    - Each attribute of Y is contained in a candidate key of R
- BCNF: Boyce-Codd Normal Form
  - Schema R is in BCNF iff whenever (X -> Y) in F+ and XY in R, then either
    - Y in R (i.e. X -> Y is trivial), or
    - X is a superkey of R
  - Simple while loop. Computationally intractible.
  - Lossless join dependency preserving BCNF decomposition may not exist.
- Minimal cover:
  - Two sets of dependencies F and G are equivalent if F+ = G+.
  - A set of dependencies G is minimal if
    - Every RHS of a dependency in F is a single attribute
    - There's no X -> A where F - {X -> A} is equivalent to F. (Nothing is redundant)
    - There's no X -> A where for Z sub X, F - {X -> A} union {Z -> A} is equivalent to F.
  - THM: For every set of dependencies F, there is a minimal cover.
- Finding minimal covers:
  - Step 1. Repeat: Replace X -> YZ with X -> Y and X -> Z.
  - Step 2. Repeat: Remove X -> A if X in ComputeX+(X, F - {X -> A}).
  - Step 3. Repeat: Remove A from LHS of X -> B if B is in ComputeX+(X - {A}, F).
  - Step 4. Repeat: Replace X -> Y and X -> Z with X -> YZ.
- Computing a 3NF decomposition:
  - TODO: Get the algo
  - Note: Dep-pres lossless-join 3NF cannot be efficiently computed.
- 2NF is also a thing. Unintuitive syntactic characterisation.

## 10: Basics of query execution

- Must consider:
  - Physical representation of data
  - How to compute answers
  - How to manage intermediate results
- How to execute queries:
  - 1. Parsing, typechecking
  - 2. Translate relational calculus to relational algebra
  - 3. Optimization. Generate an effective query plan, using statistics about the data
  - 4. Plan execution.
- Relational Algebra: Why yes, I do have a tattoo
  - Set of operations (U; R0,...,Rk, ×, σφ, πV, U, -)
  - U: universe (?)
  - Ri: Constant for each relational scheme
  - Unary operators:
    - σφ: Selection (keep only tuples satisfying φ)
    - πV: Projection (keep only attributes in V)
  - Binary operators:
    - ×: Cartesian product
    - U: union
    - -: set difference
  - Example: account(anum, type, bal, bname, branch), bank(bname, addr)
  - Projection: `π_(#1,#2)(account)` selects anum, type from account
  - Selection: `σ_(#3>5000)(account)` selects accounts with bal > 5000 
  - Product: Takes every combination of a choice of row from both tables.
  - Union/Difference: As you expect.
- SQL to Algebra:
  - THM (Codd): For every domain independent relational calculus query,
    there is an equivalent relational algebra expression.
- Iterator model:
  - Store intermediate results by using the cursor OPEN/FETCH/CLOSE interface.
  - Every implementation of a Relational Algebra operator is an iterator.
- Making it faster:
  - 1. Use disk-based data structures (indexing)
  - 2. Use better algorithms within each oeprator (sorting, hashing)
  - 3. Rewrite the relational algebra expression (planning)
- Indexes:
  - Map from column to entire row in a tree or hashmap or something
  - **Clustering index**: Similar tuples are kept close together
  - **Non-clustering index** (secondary): Instead just refers to the tuples
  - Relation can have at most one clustering index, any number of non-clustering indexes.
- Query optimization:
  - Choosing a good plan is useful.
  - Choosing the best plan is impossible.
  - Simple cost model for disk I/O assumes:
    - Uniformity: All values of an attribute are equally likely
    - Independence: Attribute values do not depend on each other
- Cost of relational operators:
  - Selection: cost(σc(E)) = (1+εc) cost(E)
  - Nested-loop join: cost(R >< S) = cost(R) + (|R|/b) cost(S)
  - Index join: cost(R >< S) = cost(R) + dS|R|
  - Sort-merge join: cost(R >< S) = cost(sort(R)) + cost(sort(S))
- After 3 or 4 joins, cost estimates are really hard and basically imposs
- Advanced Statistics:
  - Histograms
  - Correlations
  - Uniqueness (keys) and containment (inclusions)
  - Sampling
- "Always good" transformations:
  - Push selections: TODO
  - Push projections: TODO
  - Replace products by joins: TODO
- Join order selection
- Parallelism: Is also a consideration

- A2 solutions.
  - Flags still get full marks, but Grant is gonna make LOTS of entity sets.
  - Shit I forgot: Max >= Min
  - Lens specializes into (Separate, CamLens), PrimeLens
  - pnum works
  - Camera specializes into (RepLens, NonRepLens), EV, OC (OV, TTL, RF). WTF
  - Customer specializes into Domestic, Foreign
  - Purchase order cannot be relationship, since then customer cannot purchase thing more than once.
  - Instead, make purchase order a hub with several relationship spokes. Existence dependent on customers.
  - This was extremely depressing

## 11: Database tuning and physical design

- Concurrency control: Committed transactions do not interfere.
- Recovery management: Committed transactions are durable. Aborted transactions have no effect.
- Notation:
  - ri[x]: Transaction Ti reads x
  - wi[x]: Transaction Ti writes x
- Serializable schedules:
  - Equivalent to serial execution of the same transactions.
  - Interleaved execution of two transactions: Sa = w1[x] r2[x] w1[y] r2[y]
  - Equivalent serial execution: Sb = w1[x] w1[y] r2[x] r2[y]
  - Interleaved execution with no equivalent serial execution: Sc = w1[x] r2[x] r2[y] w1[y]
- Conflict equivalence: Yield conflict-serializable schedules
- View equivalence: allows more schedules, is NP-hard
- Recoverable schedule (RC): Can be undone (commits only in order of read-from dependency)
- Cascadeless schedules (ACA): No cascades (no reading uncommitted data)
- Scheduler: Can be conservative or aggressive
