## ch7

- 117
  - きんぴら: Kinpira: Japanese cooking style "sauté and simmer"
- 118
  - 器用: き\よう
  - 剥く: む/く: to peel (usually kana)
  - 渋皮: しぶかわ: astringent skin of a chestnut
  - 長持ち: ながもち: (suru verb) long lasting
  - お八つ: おやつ: between-meal snack
- 119
  - 片っ端から: かたっぱしから: every last little bit
  - 競争率: きょ/うそ\うりつ: competition rate, success rate
  - 目の当たりに: まのあたりに: just before one's eyes
  - 栗: くり: chestnut
- 120
  - 花畑: はなばた: field of flowers
  - lots on this page I didn't really follow the first read
- 121
  - ざっと: roughly, approximately
  - 料亭: りょうてい: traditional (expensive) Japanese restaurant
- 123
  - 拾う: ひろう: to pick up
  - フクフク: in this context, "nice and fat", or maybe "in a fortunate spot"?
- 124
  - 甘
  - 馬にソース: sweet sauce (e.g. applesauce?)
- 127
  - 甘酸っぱい: あまずっぱい: sweet and sour. here: bittersweet
- 128
  - あざーした: in this context, "thank you"?
  - 集合: しゅ/うごう: to meet up
  - monja: monjayaki. like okonomiyaki but runnier
- 132
  - おんなじ: hahaha not sure if intentional portmanteau (probably not)
- 133
  - 味見: あじみ: to taste/sample
  - 特訓: とっくん: special training

Kiriyama is staying with the sisters to help peel chestnuts. Tomorrow, there is
a baseball game at Hina's middle school. Hina has a crush on Takahashi-kun, the
ace and idol of the baseball team. She prepares a bento (using over ¥3000 of
ingredients!) to give to him. The next day, Kiriyama passes by the game after
having gone shopping for curtains. He sees Hina and Momo cheering from the
audience, and is reminded of what appears to be his first experience
with love; seemed kinda traumatic. Hina doesn't end up being able to give the
bento to Takahashi since the team went to Matsuda to eat monja afterward.
Kiriyama stops Hina from tossing the bento into the trash. When they get home,
Akari comforts Hina and they eat the bento. It doesn't taste very good and Akari
and Kiriyama think to themselves that maybe it was for the best that Hina didn't
give the bento this time.
